Dear friends,



Thank you so very much for taking time out of your busy schedules to join us in Ithaca for the Thought Summit on Data Science to Build Resilience and Improve Humanitarian Response. Your presentations were incredibly insightful and the discussions were rich and stimulating. We hope you found the program as fun and informative as we did and that you had a smooth trip home.



The next task is to draft the white paper and the shorter version for journal publication as a Perspective-style manuscript. As agreed among those of us who were present on Friday, each of us who wishes to participate in the white paper is to, no later than Friday, June 5, identify one portion of the revised organizing heuristic (attached, arrows forthcoming) and draft ~one page that clearly defines the current research frontier—what are best practices/technologies? (please be sure to include citations)— and one paragraph or a few bullet points identifying highest priority research topics to push out that research frontier over the next five years in that specific domain. Given each of your expertise, and per the group discussion Friday, we suggest the following initial division of labor, organized loosely around the white paper heuristic. Some topics naturally overlap, so please coordinate across groups as useful. And if you want to write on something else, please feel free. This is meant as a starting seed to your thought process, not a constraint.




Contributor(s)

Suggested white paper contribution

Lakshmi Subramanian

Digital infrastructure, real-time data systems, and practical constraints in low-resource settings

Nathan Jensen, Hongdi Zhao, Talip Kilic

Ground-level data, low-cost sensing, and sampling under budget constraints

Joanna Upton, (Brian Dillon and Talip Kilic)

Feedback loops from decision systems to survey/data-system design

David Newhouse and Peter Fisker

Geospatial prediction models for welfare, consumption, and poverty estimation

Joshua Blumenstock

Targeting and digital trace data for humanitarian aid and social protection

Sumanta Basu

Adapting ML models for (potentially state-dependent) spatiotemporal dependence in high frequency georeferenced outcomes

John Ougo Nyajeri, Liz Tennant, Nick Parazoo, and Ying Sun

Remote sensing, SIF downscaling, drought index disaggregation, and climate/agricultural signal extraction for early warning

Angie Pendergrass, Flavio Lehner, Liz Tennant, and Ying Sun

Integrating geospatial and climate data with AI for food security, malnutrition, and humanitarian early warning

Adam Sobel

Climate risk, predictability, and open-source catastrophe/climate risk modeling for humanitarian and adaptation applications

Yanyan Liu

Geo-aware learning, model outputs, features, and temporally generalizable forecasting for food crises

Vivek Srikrishnan and Susana Constenla-Villoslada

Probabilistic forecasting, uncertainty, resolution, and classification of use cases for early warning and trigger design

Chris Hillbruner

Early warning systems and trigger design for humanitarian action

Ruth Hill

Anticipatory action and anticipatory finance: current evidence, best practices, and priority research questions

Kyriacos Koupparis

Translating model outputs into operational decisions: what institutions need from data science

Chungmann (Manny) Kim

Operationalizing modeled outputs into IPC analyses and food security decision systems

Rebeca Moreno Jimenez

AI-enabled decision support systems for forced displacement and humanitarian operations

Aditya Vashistha

LLMs, RAG, and AI-enabled decision support systems in humanitarian contexts

Jenny Aker

Monitoring, impact evaluation, and learning for humanitarian and resilience interventions

Chris Barrett

Response analysis

Andrew Mude

Data science for resource mobilization

Ellyn Yakowenko

Translating research and predictive systems into fundable, policy-relevant, and operationally useful approaches

Alli Greenberg

Contextual challenges related to the decision landscape (power, processes, incentives)



Please also drop relevant papers into the Papers to Add folder and any notes you took that you’re willing to share with us as we draft the white paper in the Notes (please add) folder in our White Paper shared folder.



Over the course of June the Cornell team will then weave your contributions, the existing draft material, and notes distilled from the presentations and recordings into a draft of the white paper that we will circulate to all contributors by the first week of July, looking for comments/edits within one month. The objective is to publish the white paper and to have the draft journal Perspective manuscript ready for pre-publication review by end-August.



Thank you again for your outstanding contributions to the rich deliberations last week. If you would like to share anything about the event on LinkedIn, please feel free. We have shared some photos on the Google Drive. Please tag us @Cornell Collaboration for International Development Economics Research. We very much look forward to continuing this conversation as we advanced our shared objectives of putting data science to good use to build resilience and improve humanitarian response.



Warm regards,

Chris, Jenn, Kelsey and the Cornell CIDER team

 https://thoughtsummits.cornell.edu/summit/data-science-to-build-resilience-and-improve-humanitarian-response/

